[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA GARR: Hi, I'm Lisa Garr,
host of "Gaiam Inspirations."
And we are broadcasting
from Denver, Colorado,
with my guest, shamanic healer
Dr. Alberto Villoldo, who's
also a medical anthropologist.
We started part
one, and now this
is part two of the
interview, because we
were talking with so much
detail about shamanic medicine
and your book "One
Spirit Medicine."
And I'd love to continue
the conversation
about the luminous
body and hacking
THE biofield of the body.
What is that, specifically?
>>DR. ALBERTO VILLOLDO:
You know, hacking
is big business these days.
>>LISA: It is.
>>VILLOLDO: And
it's certainly not
in the lexicon of the shamans.
They don't talk about hacking,
but they talk about upgrading.
But in effect, the biofield
is our luminous energy field.
And when we're born, it comes
pre-loaded with software.
I just bought a
new Apple Computer,
and it came pre-loaded
with software.
Our biofield also comes
pre-loaded with software,
but it's a the software
for the species,
for the survival of the species.
>>LISA: And we all have this.
>>VILLOLDO: And we all have.
But, see, nature's interested
in the longevity of the species,
but not of the
individual so that it
ensures the longevity
of the species
by programming us
for reproduction.
Which is why we're so obsessed
with sex all of our lives.
>>LISA: Right.
>>VILLOLDO: So you want
to upgrade, to really hack
the biofield so you can
program for the longevity
of the individual.
>>LISA: Rather than the species?
>>VILLOLDO: See, the
longevity of the individual
is not of any benefit
to the species.
>>LISA: Explain.
>>VILLOLDO: Well,
because if you have
a bunch of long-lived
old mammoths, then
it's not going to
benefit the species.
It wants the young,
the vibrant--
>>LISA: Reproductive.
>>VILLOLDO: Your
reproductive years.
And then what nature does is
begins to shut certain systems
down, like your hormones.
We know the changes.
The growth hormone systems,
they begin to shut down.
The detoxification
systems inside the cell,
mitochondrial repair
systems, after the age of 40
because you're no longer
of interest to the species
for survival.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>VILLOLDO: So these
systems begin to shut down.
So the shamans discovered
how to hack the biofield.
>>LISA: Reprogram the
biofield for longevity.
>>VILLOLDO: How do you
switch these systems on
again that, for example,
we have longevity genes,
that are called
the sirtuin genes,
inside every cell in our body.
But they're silenced.
So how do you activate
the longevity genes,
because nature selects
for reproduction,
but it also selects
for intelligence.
It prefers intelligence to teeth
and to brawn and to muscle.
>>LISA: So keeping
the brain active.
>>VILLOLDO: No, so the key
is that the most intelligent
members of the species were
able to hack the biofield
to increase their
longevity by switching
on the longevity genes.
And the most
intelligent doesn't mean
the people that are smartest
or make the most money,
but the people that have access
to what we call the spiritual.
>>LISA: That's what
I was going to ask.
Do you do this from the
luminous body, or do you--
>>VILLOLDO: From
the luminous body.
>>LISA: You do it from there.
So you can reprogram the
longevity of the individual
through the luminous body.
>>VILLOLDO: Absolutely.
>>LISA: OK.
Explain what that is
and how you do that.
>>VILLOLDO: Well,
the way that it
works at the level
of the body is
that you want to switch
on the longevity genes,
the longevity proteins.
And they're called the
sirtuin genes, SIRT1 and 2.
And they are in every
cell in the body.
>>LISA: OK.
>>VILLOLDO: Now, the
beauty of these genes
is that they switch on
the antioxidant systems
inside every cell,
and they switch
on the detox pathways
inside every cell
so that you're able
to eliminate waste.
You switch on the genes
that create health
and the genes that
give you long life.
>>LISA: Can you do this
through visualization?
>>VILLOLDO: No.
>>LISA: No, OK.
>>VILLOLDO: Not unless you've
prepared your brain first.
But let me tell you a story.
I was in the Amazon
jungle one time,
and I asked an old
man, how do you
avoid the illnesses of old age?
And he said, well,
if you want to avoid
the illnesses of
old age, you simply
live a long and healthy life.
And I go, wait, wait a minute.
You didn't understand
the question.
He said, I understood
You want to avoid the
illnesses of old age,
live a long and healthy life.
And what he was
saying is that if you
can switch on the
longevity genes,
they'll protect you against
the illnesses of old age.
And they do.
>>LISA: OK, so how do you
switch on the longevity genes?
>>VILLOLDO: We know
a lot about how
you do that biologically,
the foods that do that,
like broccoli seed
is one up them.
Curcumin is another one.
Detoxifiers are another.
The caloric restriction, when
you reduce your caloric intake,
or fasting, will also switch
on the longevity genes.
>>LISA: Oh, yes.
You talk a lot about
fasting in your book.
>>VILLOLDO: That's
why fasting is
in every culture in the world.
>>LISA: Explain the
benefits of fasting.
Explain that, and for how long.
But it's really interesting.
It turns on certain genes.
>>VILLOLDO: Well, it turns
on the longevity gene.
So we're talking
about the biological.
Then we're going to
get to the energetic.
>>LISA: OK.
>>VILLOLDO: But fasting, you
find that in Christianity,
lent, and Judaism, Yom Kippur.
In Islam it's Ramadan, and
yoga, and every tradition
around the world.
Because our ancestors,
out paleolithic ancestors,
used to feast and then
fast, because they had
no refrigeration, basically.
>>LISA: Right.
>>VILLOLDO: You ate what
you caught that day,
and then it might be
another three or four days.
>>LISA: Right.
There's no leftovers.
>>VILLOLDO: There's
no leftovers.
They wouldn't last.
>>LISA: Right.
>>VILLOLDO: So we
would feast and fast.
And when we fasted, the
body would go into repair.
And we've been eating three
meals a day since we were born.
So we don't know
how to get the body
to go into the
repair mode, which
is what happens when you fast.
And then when you break
fast, when your breakfast,
you're not having
enough time to recycle.
So the ideal fasting
is 18 hours a day.
>>LISA: Oh.
>>VILLOLDO: And you're
fasting not from all foods
but only from sugars.
>>LISA: So can you do
juices, green juices?
>>VILLOLDO: So,
what you do is you
don't have any
sugars after 6:00,
and you don't have any sugars
before noon the next day.
>>LISA: Oh, OK.
I see.
>>VILLOLDO: So you don't
eat any fruit for breakfast.
You don't eat bread.
You can have breakfast
at 7:00 in the morning,
but you eat proteins and fats.
Eat a piece of salmon,
an avocado, some nuts.
You don't eat three
pieces of toast
because that turns
on the sugar system.
You can keep that
18 hour sugar free.
You don't have a glass of
wine at 10 o'clock at night.
You have it at 2:00
in the afternoon.
>>LISA: OK, that's
about right now.
>>VILLOLDO: Because
it's full of sugar.
So it's really a
fast from sugars.
>>LISA: From 6:00 to 6:00.
>>VILLOLDO: And you do it
from 6:00 in the evening
until noon the next day.
>>LISA: Oh, till noon, OK.
>>VILLOLDO: So the following
morning at 7:00 in the morning,
you have fats and proteins
for breakfast, eggs, avocado.
But you don't turn
on the sugar system.
That keeps the
recycling mode active.
And that switches on
the longevity genes.
>>LISA: I see.
>>VILLOLDO: You can also do a
longer fast, a three or five.
But the maximum benefit is
from this 18 hour daily fast.
>>LISA: OK.
That's a great daily practice.
But should you kick start
it with a longer two-day--
>>VILLOLDO: No.
You don't need to.
>>LISA: You don't need to.
>>VILLOLDO: No.
And it's dangerous to kick
start it with a longer fast,
because you'll
begin to detoxify.
But if your liver is
toxic, if you've not
cleansed the liver first,
you'll recycle those toxins.
>>LISA: Interesting,
very interesting.
So, I've done cleanses
before, and the first day
is always the hardest
because that's when the most
detoxification is happening.
>>VILLOLDO: Absolutely.
So before you detox, you
need to cleanse the liver.
And remember that
toxins are stored
in the long-lived
molecules in the body,
and these are fat cells.
So toxins are stored in fat.
When you go in a
fast very suddenly
without clearing the elimination
organs like the liver,
these toxins will get recycled.
And remember the
brain is 75% fat.
So you're taking
toxins that might
have been stored in
belly fat, and now you're
storing them in the brain.
>>LISA: Which explains why
the epidemic of obesity leads
to the epidemic of Alzheimer's.
So, I love how you take this
practical ancient wisdom
and bring it to a
level of something
that we can do in
modern society,
and you really combine the
two in such a pragmatic way.
But let's talk more about
the luminous energy field.
Now, I know that
that's not a quick fix.
It's not a matter of 18 hours.
Your luminous energy field
has changed and reprogrammed.
>>VILLOLDO: Yeah.
>>LISA: What is
it that you teach,
and how long do people
go through the programs
that you have to really change
those cellular memories--
and I want to talk about
those as well-- to change
the emotions and the feelings?
>>VILLOLDO: Well, our
training is a 30-day program.
It's a 300-hour training.
And in terms of clearing
your energy field,
you can clear a lot of
imprints in the field.
But remembered that it
comes with a caveat.
You can not clear a traumatic
or an emotional imprint
from the field until
you learn the lessons
that you need to learn.
So somebody cannot
come and take it away.
The shaman has to help
you learn the lesson,
or you're going to keep
repeating the grade.
>>LISA: So you can't
just get over it.
>>VILLOLDO: You cannot
have somebody just--
>>LISA: Take it out.
>>VILLOLDO: --take him away.
But say, what is it
that you need to learn?
And I'm sure you've
met people that say,
my cancer saved my life.
Have you ever heard someone say?
>>LISA: Oh yes.
Yes.
>>VILLOLDO: Amazing.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>VILLOLDO: They got the gifts,
and they got the lessons.
>>LISA: It was
the greatest gift.
Yes, the lessons.
And those lessons,
just learning that,
what does that do
to the biofield?
When you open up
that learning, when
you get that epiphany
of that tragic thing
happen in your life so
that you could X, Y, Z,
do what you do now,
what does that do?
Does it come from outside in?
What does that look like to you?
>>VILLOLDO: Well,
remember that the body has
an outside and an
inside, but the biofield
doesn't have an
outside and an inside.
The biofield is us.
It's who we are in
between incarnations.
See, we're in our particle
state now, the body.
In the field we're in our wave
state or in our field state.
So when we're embodied, we have
both the particle, the body
state and the field state.
But when we die, we're
only in the field state
until we create another body.
>>LISA: So we're just
slowed down matter right
now in these bodies.
>>VILLOLDO: Absolutely, yeah.
We're light that's just
been trapped into form here,
but that has information
encoded in it.
So you need to be able to
clear the field so it doesn't
predispose you to
marry another idiot
or end up with a horrible job,
or-- so that you can learn it
inside and not have to learn
it through the next city
or the next marriage
or the next job.
>>LISA: That is the most
beautiful definition
of reincarnation I have
heard, about the light body
and the energy field,
and how it slows down
to create another body.
And then goes--
>>VILLOLDO: Absolutely.
>>LISA: --back into the
bio for the energy field
and comes back down when it
wants to create another lesson.
But we do bring the coding,
the information back
from the other lifetimes here.
So you're saying
with the intelligence
that we have now or
the information that
has come into existence
now, it's always been there,
but it's really come
into this lifetime now.
>>VILLOLDO: Absolutely.
>>LISA: In an
interesting way, why?
>>VILLOLDO: Well,
we came here to make
a difference in the world.
>>LISA: This incarnation?
>>VILLOLDO: Yeah.
>>LISA: At this time.
>>VILLOLDO: We've all been
together before, many,
many times.
>>LISA: Right.
>>VILLOLDO: And many of us have
been in medicine societies.
We've been shamans and
medicine people and scientists
in the past.
And we've come.
The shamans tell a story
that before we were born,
we were all gathered in
this great green field,
and this very big angel
came out and said,
you know it's going to be a very
challenging time on the earth.
There's going to be war.
There's going to be famine.
There's going to be rap music.
There's going to be--
and we need healers.
Who wants to come?
And we all
volunteered because of
this tremendous
apocalyptic time that we're
living through in the earth.
And we all came here
to make a difference.
>>LISA: Every single person.
>>VILLOLDO: Every single
one of us who's here.
We didn't come here to spend
another year in therapy.
We came here to
start a revolution.
>>LISA: Why are so many
dying so early, then?
>>VILLOLDO: Were you planning to
ask me this question all along?
Some of us go home first
and some of us later.
But remember, what
you've asked is really
the critical question.
Why are so many of us dying?
Because we are right now in the
sixth major extinction event.
Since the dawn of life on this
planet, there have been six.
This is the sixth
mass extinction event.
And they happen in a very,
very compact period of time.
The last one was
when a meteorite
struck the earth 65
million years ago
and wiped out the dinosaurs.
Right now there are more species
dying per year than have ever
perished in the past.
>>LISA: Ever, yes.
>>VILLOLDO: This is the
sixth major extinction event.
And Gaia, Mother
Earth, loves life.
And whenever she finds herself
in an extinction event,
evolution is accelerated
tremendously.
And we can quantum leap.
And this is what the
shamans speak about,
that we are becoming
a new species.
There's a new human being
born on the planet today,
and it's us.
>>LISA: It's us, and
there's a whole generation
of babies and millennials
that have also come in.
But what about those that
are 50, 60, 70 years old?
Can we rebirth into
that new generation?
>>VILLOLDO: Well, see, from
the perspective of biology,
evolution happens, quantum leaps
happen, in between generations,
so that maybe our kids will
be smarter and handsomer
than we are, or they'll be
the emerald, the rainbow,
the crystal children.
But for the shamans, evolution
happens within generations.
So you and I can take
that quantum leap.
>>LISA: OK.
>>VILLOLDO: And
maybe the children
will inherit the traits
that we develop, and they'll
have the opportunity to take
the quantum-- they're born
a little bit more advanced.
But it's up to us to take it, to
create the morphogenetic field
that can establish a new human,
Homo luminous, in the planet.
And this is what the shamans
are really good at doing.
>>LISA: These kids
are coming in so smart
that they don't need the elders,
except they can't find them
because they're so deep into
the rain forest at this point.
Can I ask you a question
about the mass extinction?
When you said that there was the
meteor that came in and wiped
out the dinosaurs,
it sounded like that
was a fairly quick extinction.
But now this is a
slower experience.
Do you understand
what I'm saying?
>>VILLOLDO: Mm-hmm.
>>LISA: Why is it
slower, or what
do we do with that information,
that we could actually change?
>>VILLOLDO: All of the
previous mass extinction events
have been catalyzed by
nature or by natural events.
A meteorite striking,
a food crisis
in the planet where green
plants evolved because of a food
shortage.
There was a big food
crisis in the planet.
Life was beginning to eat
not only the available
food but each other.
And then these life forms
said, hey, wait a minute.
We can eat directly
from the sun.
We don't need to
do chemosynthesis.
We can do photosynthesis.
Wow, what a
discovery, incredible.
But 95% of the species
that lived at that time
were destroyed.
These were all natural events.
Now, this is a man-made
event, the pollution
of the earth, the depletion of
the ozone, the climate change.
And it's happening very
rapidly in geological time.
It's happening within
the space of 20 years.
And that's a time
that's terrifying,
but it's a time where
we can quantum leap.
>>LISA: To another planet or--
>>VILLOLDO: No, into
another being, into not Homo
sapiens but Homo luminous.
Because what the shaman
traditionally did,
they had two central teachings.
The first one was they said
that the object of shamanism
is to learn how to get
out of this life alive,
so to take your consciousness
with you beyond death.
And the second is to dream
the world into being.
Because in the Judeo-Christian
mythology, on the seventh day,
God says that all creation's
complete, that all that's left
is the naming of the
plants and the animals.
But in the indigenous
mythologies,
they say that on
the seventh day,
the great spirit said,
you know, I created
the whales and the butterflies.
Aren't they beautiful?
And now you finish it.
Creation is not complete.
And that's--
>>LISA: So we have
that responsibility.
>>VILLOLDO: These are the
two things the shamans do.
They create, and they take their
consciousness beyond death.
They complete creation.
They dream the world into being.
>>LISA: Do they talk
about other galaxies
at all that are
existing in the state
of our original existence?
>>VILLOLDO: Mm-hmm, oh yeah.
>>LISA: 65,000
billion years ago.
>>VILLOLDO: And other realms.
>>LISA: What do
they say of those?
Do you mind?
I know this is a
health conversation.
We'll get back to that.
But I just want to ask
about the galaxies.
>>VILLOLDO: Well, they say
that it's really kind of very
narcissistic to think
that we're the only life
forms in the universe.
>>LISA: Right, completely, yeah.
>>VILLOLDO: And that
there are worlds
that are energetic worlds
that are not even visible,
but they're all
populated with life.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>VILLOLDO: And that we transit
between those worlds of form
and formlessness, the visible
and the invisible world.
So when you die, you don't
just wait to be incarnated back
in the earth.
When you journey to the next
world, if you go consciously,
you're born into great fields
of beauty and consciousness,
where you continue
your evolution.
>>LISA: Can you do
that while you sleep?
>>VILLOLDO: And you do.
You visit them when you sleep.
You can, yeah.
>>LISA: I believe that we do.
I absolutely believe that
and that there's information
that we can bring back from
those other realms that are
either evolved or de-evolved.
They're in their natural state.
However, I just
wanted to find out
what the shamans
had to say about it.
So, bringing it back down to the
conversation of the biofield,
of our luminous energy--
which I love what we just did.
We went from here to here
to out to the realms,
and now we're back here again.
So let's talk about how we
can do this with healing.
You mentioned healing
within the biofield
to change our past
in this lifetime.
You do that through
reprogramming,
or shamans do that
through reprogramming.
And you teach people
how to do that.
So this can be learned.
>>VILLOLDO: We train people.
Yeah, absolutely.
If you clear the
imprint in the field,
you're creating the
conditions for health,
and then the body follows.
Then the instructions--
>>LISA: It's that easy.
>>VILLOLDO: --change.
>>LISA: It's not
easy, but it's doable.
>>VILLOLDO: Let me
give you an example.
One of our clients, very smart
woman, works at the Pentagon,
Department of the Navy, is
diagnosed with a brain tumor.
And she goes to see
her neurologist, who
sends her to a neurosurgeon.
Then she goes to
visit the co-author
of my last book,
"Power Up Your Brain,"
Dr. Perlmutter, who's a
distinguished neurologist.
All of the MRIs show a brain
tumor, inoperable, big,
golf ball, sizable golf ball.
And we have a couple
of healing sessions,
so she starts doing her
practice and her meditation.
She went through our
training program,
so she knows the
self-healing methodologies.
A month later, goes
in for another MRI,
and the tumor's gone.
And the radiologist says,
well, these things just
don't disappear.
And she says, yes they do.
>>LISA: Oh wow.
>>VILLOLDO: And he says,
well, let's do another image.
And they go back, take another
picture, and it's gone.
And he says, well--
>>LISA: What did you do?
Is the next question.
>>VILLOLDO: No, no, he didn't.
She said, to him, do you
want to know how I did it?
He said no.
>>LISA: Oh my goodness.
>>VILLOLDO: No, because this is
in the realm of the anomalous,
of the extraordinary,
whereas for the shaman
this is in the realm
of the ordinary,
the realm of everyday miracles.
>>LISA: Plus he wouldn't have a
job because he couldn't do MRIs
any longer.
So that's a perfect story,
as well as the medical system
that we have does operate, as
you had mentioned in part one,
on a disease state
rather than health state
and manages disease rather
than manages health.
And that's what
they're trained to do.
And it's not to make them wrong,
but that is the current system.
What do you feel about our--
>>VILLOLDO: That's what
they know how to do.
And they do it really well.
If a snake bites you, you don't
want to go see your shaman.
>>LISA: Right.
>>VILLOLDO: You want
to go to the ER.
Then you want to
go to your shaman
to find out why it bit
you in the first place.
>>LISA: Or a stroke or
any of those things,
you want to go directly to-
>>VILLOLDO: Yeah.
Western medicine is
great for trauma,
but it's not great
for prevention.
And what the shaman does
is to clear imprints
from your physical
field, from the field
of the family or the village,
so that you can maintain health.
>>LISA: And we have a
beautiful video here
about your experience with
ayahuasca and talking about it.
And I want you to take a
look at the video right now,
and we're going to
talk about the journey
that you have taken.
And take a look at this.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>VILLOLDO: The shaman
experiences the voice
and the gifts of
the medicine plants
by going through four
steps of their initiation.
And this is an
initiation that all of us
must go through in order
to tap into the fullness
of our human potential.
>>JAVIER ZAVALA:
When somebody comes
to take the plant
for the first time,
they always fear
what will happen
to them if they go into
this different state
of consciousness.
It's important to trust
that the person who
is assisting you and
giving you the plant
will help you
overcome these fears.
[CHANTING]
>>MARCELLA LOBOS: One of
the most important voices
that you recognize by
participating in ceremony
will be the voice of Dr.
Ayahuasca, to whom you
can ask to help you
heal anything that you
need to heal in your life.
And the other very
important voice
is the voice of the earth,
Mother Earth, Pachamama,
who is the director
of the ceremony.
>>VILLOLDO: The fourth
step in initiation
is returning back to our
homes and our communities
with gifts that we're
ready and willing to share
with others with humility.
The gift of having seen
through the eyes of God
is a beautiful one, but
it's not difficult enough.
So bring back a
gift that's for you
that will be a gift for others.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: I read a quote
from your website
that said that the shamans
were the first neuroscientists.
And that video
talks a little bit
about how we were
really able to--
or they were really able
to-- explore the brain.
What was your first
experience with ayahuasca?
Could you share?
>>VILLOLDO: Well,
my first experience
was many years ago, probably
40 years ago, in the Amazon,
before it was very popular.
And I went to visit an
old man, and he looked
at me kind of skeptically.
And he said, why do
you want to do this?
And I said, I want to
know myself better.
And he looked at me carefully,
and he said, no you don't.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>VILLOLDO: Because
I was a mess.
I was a bundle of pain
and agony and suffering.
And I insisted.
And then he prepared the brew.
We had a nighttime ceremony, and
that started out beautifully.
I was looking at the sky.
I felt I was in communion
with all of nature.
And then I go to
the edge of-- there
was a pool, very still
pool, full moon night.
I still remember it.
And I walk into
the pool, and I'm
looking at my
reflection in the pool
with the full moon behind me.
And I see this very
large bird, and it
was like a condor,
eight-foot wingspan,
come and land next to me.
And it starts pecking
at my reflection
on the pool on the
water, at my face.
And I can feel its beak
going into my physical face
and ripping off my face,
the most painful experience
that I had ever had.
And the shaman comes and blows
smoke over me, takes me back in
and sings.
And he says to me, that was your
death that was stalking you.
And in order for
you to live, you
have to let go of that face
and all of the other faces
that you have so carefully
crafted for the world so much
so that you don't even
know who you are anymore.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>VILLOLDO: And that's when
my apprenticeship began.
>>LISA: I would say so.
You can't go back after that.
>>VILLOLDO: Yeah.
>>LISA: I've heard
from many people who
have had the experience
that they don't go back
to who they were ever.
They're not an option.
Is that because it so
significantly changes deep,
deep into your psyche?
>>VILLOLDO: The plant
doesn't do anything.
The plant structurally is
identical to serotonin,
which is a neurotransmitter.
So it's identical.
It's like your brain
is flooded suddenly
with neurotransmitter and
all of it lights up at once.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>VILLOLDO: So the
problem is being
able to hold the
experience so it
doesn't become another great
adventure that you've had.
And that's why in
the jungle, you
have to go through a dieta, or
a diet, with the neuro-nutrients
and the brain
supplements that upgrade
the quality of the brain so
you can bring it back 100%.
But even the 50% that
most people bring back
is life changing.
>>LISA: There's many ceremonies
around now, even the US.
>>VILLOLDO: Everywhere.
The plant has made its
way around the world.
>>LISA: It has.
But what would be, if someone
were to have a first time
experience, what would
you recommend as the most
authentic experience?
>>VILLOLDO: Well,
remember, ayahuasca
is the most powerful
psychoactive
agent known to the Indian.
And this is your brain on a
very powerful psychoactive.
You've got to be with a master.
Today everybody in
the Amazon is a shaman
because you can buy the
ayahuasca in the market,
and a lot of visitors come and
they want to have experiences.
You need to work with a master.
So if you're going to
go study mathematics,
you want to go to MIT.
And if you want to learn about
your brain with ayahuasca,
you want to work with
somebody who's masterful.
And you need to know what's in
the brew, what you're taking.
>>LISA: Of course.
>>VILLOLDO: Because
they can mix in plants
that are psychedelic but
don't have the healing
benefit of the ayahuasca.
But it's extraordinary.
>>LISA: What's the healing
benefit of it, other than the--
>>VILLOLDO: It
repairs your brain.
One of the things it
does is that it upgrades
the quality of the brain.
>>LISA: Permanently.
>>VILLOLDO: Well, at least
for a short period until you
return to your regular diet.
>>LISA: Oh.
>>VILLOLDO: So,
because serotonin
will repair the regions in the
brain, the hippocampus, that
are associated with learning.
And you're able to learn
a new perspective on life.
>>LISA: If you've had brain
trauma or brain injury,
is it something
that would repair?
>>VILLOLDO: No.
>>LISA: No.
>>VILLOLDO: No, we don't
prescribe it for brain injury.
But this is more for everyday
pathologies like you and I have
and many other people
where we're stressed out
and living with the
burdens of Western beliefs
and civilization.
So it's very liberating,
can be very illuminating.
It has to be used with caution.
>>LISA: You mentioned
that the standard diet,
if people go back
to the standard diet
and how toxic that
is for the brain.
What is the diet
that is recommended
that could repair and heal the
brain without the ayahuasca
experience?
>>VILLOLDO: When you do the
ayahuasca, have you done it?
>>LISA: No.
>>VILLOLDO: You have to do it.
>>LISA: Yeah, I know.
>>VILLOLDO: Yeah, OK.
Good.
Go try it out.
>>LISA: I would do
it with you, though.
>>VILLOLDO: How much
time do we have?
>>LISA: You lead the ceremonies?
>>VILLOLDO: I don't.
I don't lead journeys.
>>LISA: You don't.
>>VILLOLDO: There are
many people who do.
Do it carefully.
But you want to feed your brain
the fats and the proteins.
>>LISA: OK.
>>VILLOLDO: And then
you want to fast
for a couple of
days before you come
into the ayahuasca ceremony.
>>LISA: Which we talked about,
the fasting, the importance
of that.
>>VILLOLDO: The fasting
is really important.
But in terms of
how do you maintain
this really big picture
of what life is about,
I think that your
nutrition is essential,
and I think that
being able to stop
the chatter of the mind, which
is that lymbic Neanderthal mind
we talked about in our first
program that's chattering all
the time, that's terrified,
that's angry, that's resentful,
that feels it was cheated,
that deserved better,
that that brain
needs to be stopped.
And you do that through
the right nutrients,
through meditation,
and then through going
to places of power
in nature, which
is what the shamans
call the vision
quest, the journey to
places of power in nature
where you can be infused
with the power of the earth
and of nature.
>>LISA: And it
could be the ocean.
It could be a
mountain, where you
feel that there is reverence.
>>VILLOLDO: Yes, a place that
has not been contaminated
by civilization or by rubbish.
>>LISA: So, in your book,
in "One Spirit Medicine,"
you bring about
mostly the experience
that you've had over the
last three years of repairing
your entire body from
the level of toxicity
that you picked up
from the traveling.
What is the most
important message
that you want people to
take away from the book?
>>VILLOLDO: Well, the book
is really the guidebook
for transforming
human consciousness
and in the process
healing the body.
This is what healed
my body, what
allowed me to grow a new body.
I heal differently now.
I age differently.
And it will also help
me to die differently.
So this is probably the
wisdom of the ancients,
together with the
neuroscience of enlightenment.
And in a really practical
guide that you can take,
it has the diet, the nutrition
plans, the supplements--
the supplements that upgrade
the brain, the supplements that
detoxify the body.
And so it has it
at the biological,
at the level of your
mind and your beliefs,
and at the level of
your sacred journey.
How do you make your journey
through life a sacred one
and not just getting--
>>LISA: By.
>>VILLOLDO: --by from
one day to the next.
>>LISA: Right, right.
And then, if you
ever encounter--
do have the mindset to
ever get a flu or a cold?
>>VILLOLDO: Mm-hmm.
>>LISA: You do?
>>VILLOLDO: Yeah.
>>LISA: You would catch those.
>>VILLOLDO: Oh, I do.
I get sick like
anybody else does.
>>LISA: You do.
>>VILLOLDO: But
it goes through me
in two days instead
of two weeks.
>>LISA: Because--
>>VILLOLDO: Because disease
at the physical level
tends to cling on to
cellular memories and trauma
that we haven't cleared yet.
So the clearer you
become, the faster
it goes through your system.
>>LISA: Fascinating.
Well, and then in terms
of your mortality,
it doesn't feel like you have
any fear of your own death.
>>VILLOLDO: I'm terrified of it.
>>LISA: You are?
>>VILLOLDO: No.
I'm actually-- it's a
mixture of awe and terror,
because it's a great
journey to the unknown.
And I've been close to
death a number of times,
and in the moment
there's no fear.
It's the thought of death
that makes us fearful.
The experience of
death is natural.
We know how to be born,
and we know how to die.
We know how to do it.
>>LISA: Yeah.
We know how to transition
at a cellular level,
on a soul level.
So, I'm going to
have you take a look
at this clip of this video
called "Shaman Healer Sage"
that actually Dr.
Villoldo talks about how
to help you transition somebody
into death or another realm.
And this is extremely
helpful for people.
Take a look.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>VILLOLDO: He knew my mentor,
Antonio, and in the early days
objected to my training,
believing that these teachings
were only for the Indians.
Slowly with time, he came to
recognize that he came here
to be a shaman to the world,
not only to his village,
to his tribe, to his region,
but to the entire earth.
And I was the very
first Westerner
that he ever gave
his initiation to.
And after I received his
Karpai, his initiation,
he said to me, take
it into the world.
Share it with others.
Don't keep it for yourself only.
You, like me, are a bridge.
We're a bridge between the
ancient and the future.
And if our bridge collapses,
our children's children
will have to rebuild
this world from scratch.
So I took him up on his offer.
I received his initiation.
I shared with others.
And I became a bridge
between the ancient medicine
and the new science that is
emerging today in the West.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: Have you received
a lot of comments
of people that have really
used those techniques?
>>VILLOLDO: We get
them all the time.
And we've forgotten the
death rites in the West.
We don't--
>>LISA: I didn't even know
there were death rites.
>>VILLOLDO: Yeah.
Well, in some religion, there's
a little bit of superficial.
But we've forgotten
how to help someone
make the journey back home.
And believe me, we're going
to need to use these someday.
>>LISA: Yes.
Yes, I had a friend who went
through a very difficult--
>>VILLOLDO: Yes, absolutely.
And when you go,
you want somebody
that can help you, take
you at least to the doorway
if not all the way through.
But the rites were designed
to set the luminous body
free from the physical
body, to unwind the chakras,
set the luminous body free,
and usher it to the highest
spiritual realm so
you don't get caught
in the bardos or the
purgatories or those earthbound
places of suffering.
>>LISA: Do you address the
person that's left behind?
Because that's
usually the hardest.
The person that's left behind
is still in this plane,
in this world dealing with the
aftereffects of the loved one.
>>VILLOLDO: Well, you work
with the whole family.
You have to work with
the whole family.
And I remember one of our
students, English woman,
very proper in her
mid-50s who had
lived in London during World War
II when the Nazis were bombing
London nightly.
And one day, she
lost her way home,
and the soldiers take her
to an anti-aircraft battery.
And they were shooting
at Nazi airplanes,
and they hit this airplane.
And she swears she can remember
looking into the wind screen
and seeing this young
German aviator that
was also never going to go
back home to his mother.
She thought she
would never do that.
And the plane crashed.
And I met her 40
years later, and she
had this amazing situation,
because the spirit
of this young aviator had
attached itself to her--
>>LISA: Oh my goodness.
>>VILLOLDO: --and had been
living with her for 40 years.
So we had to remove this
young man who did not
know that he was
dead-- he thought
he was in a nightmare he
couldn't wake up from--
and then do the
death rites on him,
who had died 40 years
earlier, to help
him go across consciously.
Fascinating.
>>LISA: My goodness.
And what were her ailments?
>>VILLOLDO: Well,
she had no ailments,
except that she could
not be in a sustainable
relationship, was always
drawn to military-like men.
But of course, she was
dedicated to this young man.
They were in relationship.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>VILLOLDO: Now, this is not
the solution for anyone who just
cannot get a good relationship.
>>LISA: Yeah, but
this specific story.
>>VILLOLDO: This
particular case--
>>LISA: It further
describes the luminous body
and how we do go from
the physical form
to the light form to
spirit and then back.
And it can transcend
a number of ways.
>>VILLOLDO: Absolutely.
And this is what
this book is about.
This is what I've tried to
do with "One Spirit Medicine"
and what we teach our students
at the Four Winds Society.
>>LISA: Is to work
with the luminous body.
>>VILLOLDO: Yes, to work with
the subtle essence of who
we are and not only
with the gross.
>>LISA: Well, both is
necessary, as you describe.
But your wisdom is amazing.
Your way to communicate
it back to us
is something that I
am so grateful for.
And this interview
I can tell you
has changed the way that I live.
>>VILLOLDO: Thank you, Lisa.
>>LISA: It has put into words
the way that I've always felt.
But you really have
made so much sense.
You have a beautiful
way of bringing it
to such a practical level.
Thank you so much.
>>VILLOLDO: Thank you, dear.
>>LISA: It's been a pleasure.
>>VILLOLDO:
Blesslings, blessings.
>>LISA: Thank you so much.
>>VILLOLDO: Thank you.
>>LISA: All right.
If you would like to watch
a replay of my interview
with Dr. Villoldo, you
can go to gaiamtv.com,
and you can share it
with your friends.
Until next time, I invite
you to stay inspired.
[MUSIC PLAYING]